---
layout: post
title:  "Keyword Help: class"
date:   2015-07-08 15:37:30
categories: docs
---

	keywords: class, public, private, protected, this

These keywords are used when defining your own objects. Objects can be quite complicated.

A class is similar to a struct, except it can have functions attached to it as well as variables, and they can have varying levels of visibility.

A class has two special methods, called the constructor and destructor. They are automatically called when an object is created or destroyed, respectively. They are responsible for setting up the object, and freeing any of its resources. If you do not specify one, you will still get a default one that does nothing, courtesy of the compiler.

Variables and functions within a class can be marked public, protected, or private:

	public:		Anyone can use these
	protected:	Only me and my children can use these
	private:	Only I can use these

Within an object, you can obtain a pointer to yourself with the this keyword.

Functions defined in an object must have a body defined somewhere.

Usage:

	class MyClass {

		public:		//these can be seen by anyone who has the object

			MyClass(int _x);	//constructor
			~MyClass();			//destructor

			void setX(int newX){	//you can define a function here

				x = newX; 

			}

			int getX();

		protected:	//these can be seen only by the object istslf and its children

			protectedFunction(){}

		private:	//these can be seen only by the object itself

			int x; //my number!

	}

	//or you can define functions here, like this
	MyClass::MyClass(int _x){

		x = _x;

	}

	MyClass::~MyClass(){} //empty

	void MyClass::getX(){

		return this->x; //you can use the this pointer too

	}
